an extension that adds a device side abort function (#808)
KhronosGroup/OpenCL-Docs: extensions/cl_ext_device_side_abort.asciidoc

A new function: ::
+
--

[source,c]
----
void abort_platform(void);
----

Stops the kernel execution and causes an abnormal unrecoverable termination of
the host process, thus causing abortion of execution of the whole program at
the platform level.

Calling the device side abort also causes the printf buffer to be flushed on the
host program's standard output before aborting the host process. This allows to
implement device side assertion functionality by using the OpenCL C printf
function and this extension.

The host should abort the process at latest when the kernel command that called
the function has finished execution, which means that all the WIs will
either call abort_platform() or return from the kernel command otherwise.

The host process is expected to call the standard abort function of the host
operating system. In POSIX/C99-compliant systems, this must be implemented by
a call to abort() which implies that the SIGABRT signal is raised and can be
caught by defining a signal handler. This means that a minimal implementation
of a device-side abort with a CPU device can simply call the standard abort()
directly to implement compliant behavior.

> The results of an aborted kernel command are undefined. Device side abort is

Author: ```suggestion
The results produced by an aborted kernel command are undefined. Device side abort is
```

guaranteed to stop the kernel command as soon as possible, even in the presence

> of deadlocks or partially reached barriers in the kernel command.

Reviewer: Unsure to be honest. I think it's a good idea in principle, but it does change certain implementation details. Like if a thread calling `abort_platform` causes a dead-lock, it might lead to a kernel driver to timeout the GPU job and that alone is undefined behavior, not just "undefined results".

Some implementations might just not be able to terminate the running kernel without undefined behavior. But now this extension actually defines it: it needs to terminate at some point.

I think calling `abort_platform` in itself causes undefined behavior and runtimes can only guarantee anything that happens afterwards on a best effort basis.

Author: The basis for this extension's semantics are the one of libc's abort() and the [__trap()](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/parallel-thread-execution/index.html#miscellaneous-instructions-trap) of CUDA. It would be useful to be able to implement both of those with this extension. 

I'm not sure what CUDA's "generate an interrupt to the host CPU" should imply, but to me the natural semantics here is to abort the whole (host) process and bring down the GPU resources, similar to killing a threaded CPU-only host application with multiple threads running and one of them calling abort().

Reviewer: > chipStar implements (or workarounds the lack of) this extension by means of a host-shared variable which a host thread polls and if set to 1 by the device, calls abort(). Do you suggest that even if the process is aborted this way (thus invoking the OS resource cleanup) there is a risk of instability in AMD's case? 

Only if the kernel itself is misbehaving as a result. If the kernel just terminates normally, even after one thread quits, there is no danger. The issue simply just starts once it times out, or causes invalid memory accesses, etc....

The control flow behavior within the work-group of a kernel command with
a WI that called the device side abort is the same as immediately
returning from the kernel for the abort-calling WI at the abort call site.
For possible WIs that do not call abort, the return time is undefined and can
adhere to the original control flow of the kernel as long as all the WIs
eventually finish the execution and allow the host runtime to abort the

> process also in a single-threaded/non-interrupting implementation.

Reviewer: The phrasing here is a bit hard to grasp what's actually meant.

Assuming we have control flow that is well defined with all threads participating, but now a single thread calls `abort_platform` and quits. If that causes an infinite loop an implementation might be able to guarantee that "the return time is undefined and can adhere to the original control flow of the kernel", however, this extension specifies that an implementation is only allowed of doing so "as long as all the WIs eventually finish the execution and allow the host runtime to abort the process", but what if they can't, because the one thread is causing issues?

Is it legal for an implementation to time out the kernel invocation, which might even cause system level problems, like a full GPU reset or even worse, a system reboot, in which case you won't get to see any printf buffer's contents?

> For possible WIs that do not call abort, the return time is undefined and can
> adhere to the original control flow of the kernel as long as all the WIs
> eventually finish the execution and allow the host runtime to abort the
> process also in a single-threaded/non-interrupting implementation.

Author: ```suggestion
For possible other WIs that do not call abort can run for an undefined and
adhere to the original control flow of the kernel until the host detects the abort
request and ramps down the execution. Work-items misbehaving (for example
by means of illegal memory accessess) after the abort has been called result in undefined behavior, as normally.
```

@karolherbst could something along this lines cover your concerns?
